GIS Panel Discussion; SciPy 2013 Presentation
=============================================

June 26, 2013
SciPy 2013 Conference, Austin, TX 

Moderator: Kelsey Jordhal, Enthought

Participants:

  - Serge Rey (Arizona State U)
  - Shaun Walbridge (Esri)
  - Andrew Wilson (TWDB)


Earlier talks in the GIS mini-symposium by:

  - Alexander Crosby, Applied Science Associates
  - Carissa Gleason, Geodecisions
  - Kytt MacManus, Columbia University / CIESIN
  - Eric C. Bruning, Texas Tech University

This transcript has been lightly edited for clarity, including the removal of most [fillers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Filler_(linguistics)).

[Full Video on YouTube](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dn540ERYcxo) (49 min)

Conversation
============

Introductions
-------------

Kelsey: We are a diverse group of people, and our common interest here is really certain kinds of data, that just happens to be geospatial. And that's all kinds of fields, it's a lot of fields in the natural scientists, but it's also social sciences, and geographers, and other people. So we've got a wide range of people here.  So the format we're going to have here is to let the three panelists introduce themselves, and just talk briefly about how they use Python, how it connects to geospatial data, and anything else they want to say as introduction.  I'll start off with a question, and then I'll open it up to questions from the audience at that point. So we'll start here.

Shaun: Hi, I'm Shaun Walbridge, I currently work at Esri or "E-S-R-I", depending on how long you've heard of the company. Actually when I was doing my interview, I just waited for someone to say it before I said it back to anyone, because I wasn't sure. So I've worked at Esri for about the last year, and I work directly for our Chief Scientist, who's Dawn Wright, she came to Esri about a year and a half ago herself from Oregon State University, her twitter handle is [@deepseadawn](https://twitter.com/deepseadawn) and she's prodigious there if you want to follow her and see what she's talking about. Basically, I'm kind of her research hands. So she has her own research agenda she brought with her from her academic past, and she wants to carry that out, so I'm really trying to work on developing tools for ocean scientists that use Esri's software stack, and those tools are open source but there's a dependency on [ArcPy](http://resources.arcgis.com/en/help/main/10.1/index.html#/What_is_ArcPy/000v000000v7000000/), so there's a closed source dependency in there.

I've used Python for quite a while, I was just thinking when I first used Python, it was some dataset that I was trying to access, and the people who wrote it, they decided that it would be great if you could only use this dataset on Solaris, and so it was-- I think big-endian-- and I needed little endian, so I used a Python script to do that. And I was like, wow this is awesome, we should be doing this all the time for spatial data. I know the open source world relatively well, and Python, because for the last eight years prior to coming to Esri I worked at a [research branch of UCSB](http://www.nceas.ucsb.edu/), that studied ecological data, and we used a lot of open source there, along with some closed source software. So, I guess that's about it for me, I'll pass it on to you.

Andrew: Hey everybody, my name is Andy Wilson. I'm a geographer by training. Right now I work here in Austin at the [Texas Water Board](http://www.twdb.state.tx.us/), and we handle water issues for the entire state. I work with surface water, so it's lakes, rivers, streams, that kind of thing. We do things like taking SONAR data that we collect from the lake, and turning that into a model of what the bottom of the lake might look like. We use a lot of the [Scipy stack](http://www.scipy.org/stackspec.html#stackspec), `scipy`/`numpy` mainly, and a lot of the various tools, [Shapely](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Shapely) and things like that, it's a lot of fun. We also use Python for web development to kind of share some of our data, and make it very easy to communicate to the public. So we're kind of dabbling with that. I find it to be a very nice language to write nice maintainable code that a lot of people can then work on without kind of stepping on each other too much-- it's kind of easy to modularize, and there's a whole lot of nice features, and there's kind of a module for everything. That's what I am.

Serge: Hi my name is Serge Rey, I'm [a professor in the Department of Geography and Urban Planning at ASU](http://geoplan.asu.edu/rey), that's Arizona State University, where Eric, it is 107F today, so we've got you beat, and I'm very happy to be here and not there. I'm affiliated with the [GeoDa center](http://geodacenter.asu.edu/) for geospatial computation and analysis, where our main product is [PySAL](https://geodacenter.asu.edu/pysal), which I gave a talk about last year at SciPy, not this year. I think it'd be easier for me to list the things I don't use Python for, I pretty much use it for everything! My research and teaching interests are on geocomputation, exploratory geospatial data analysis, space-time analysis, spatial econometrics, primarily. I teach courses in that, I do research in those areas, and PySAL is, basically, my own dog food to try and open it up and make it available to the broader community. So I'm very excited to be here, it's a fantastic conference and I'm looking forward to a good discussion.

Biggest Need?
-------------

Kelsey: OK, thanks. And the question I wanted to ask to start off things: Where do you see the biggest need for tools, in Python or to use in the Python ecosystem, for working with spatial data. What are the biggest needs we have and biggest limitations we have going forward. If you could say what you think that might be.

Shaun: Yeah, so I guess, one thing that's prevalent right now in a lot of the packages we have, they have hard C dependencies, or they're basically ports. So in the case of [GEOS](http://geos.osgeo.org/), you've got the [JTS](http://tsusiatsoftware.net/jts/main.html) to GEOS to Shapely kind of full, multi-language conversion going on. So we kind of owe a lot of technical debt to a broader community other than Python developers, and just having more people share some of the specific stuff they're doing in Python would probably be a really good kick start to... you know that's one of the interesting things that I definitely agree with, that Python, the thing that makes it so powerful is that it is a glue language for all these different problem domains, and that's what makes it so great for people who are working with spatial data, that it can pull in the infrastructure from their specific sub-domain, AND deal with the spatial stuff simultaneously. But I think maybe we're still a little behind on that spatial side of that story. So, I think there's a lot of cool stuff that could be done in the community.

Andrew: So I guess one thing that I don't know if it's absolutely necessary, but something that I find myself kind of wanting sometimes, is a kind of really nice, dynamic interactive tool. So something like [matplotlib](http://matplotlib.sourceforge.net/), and granted, we can render our geospatial data to `matplotlib` pretty efficiently, but something that was maybe, not two steps away, but was maybe a little bit more dynamic and kind of invites playing and exploring with the results a little bit better.

Serge: I think one of the areas where there's a huge opportunity, and maybe it's a problem right now, I was at the [Open Source Geospatial Research and Education Symposium](http://www.ogrs2012.org/index.php/ogrs2012/ogrs2012) which is every three years, next year it's in Finland, and given the ports of Python to [QGIS](http://qgis.org), and [ArcGIS](http://www.esri.com/software/arcgis/), it really struck me that in this conference, it was in Switzerland, that there was very little discussion of anything Python at this conference. It was all [GRASS](http://grass.osgeo.org/) and [R](http://r-project.org). And it first just struck me because, my world's Python, and I think part of that is, we see that reflected in the conference here, I remember coming to my first SciPy was 2003 and I made the exact same comment that Kytt did, I'm the token social scientist here, and thing's really haven't changed that much, I guess there's two of us now. But there's huge interest in political science, economics, epidemiology, a host of social sciences, who are primarily the users of PySAL, if we can tap into that community and help spread the word about the power of SciPy, and the Python science stack for human/social science applications of geospatial technologies, and we could also benefit from engaging with our colleagues at the conference here to learning more about HPC, and all these tools. So I think it's more of a community building type opportunity that we need to be focusing on.

Custom Python in ArcGIS?
------------------------

Kelsey: So I'd like to open it up to questions, from the audience here.

Alex Crosby, ASA Research: I think this is sort of directed to Shaun. As I understand it, Esri has sort of a lot of custom Python modules,  like there own version of `numpy`, that interacts with `ArcPy`, but that makes it difficult to write code that we can then port to `ArcPy`, or have `ArcPy` users use, since, perhaps the `numpy` versions are slightly different and that causes problems, is that something that's being addressed, or is that a problem that actually exists? I feel like it exists in our work.

Shaun: Yeah, just a little recap for those people who don't use ArcGIS. So, basically ArcGIS includes this library called ArcPy, that exposes maybe around 70% of the functionality of ArcGIS, that can be accessed through this Python module, and we ship installation of Python 2.7.2, I think, with every copy of ArcGIS, and it comes with two libraries by default, that's `matplotlib` and `numpy`. So, I don't know actually, the answer to your actual question, but I think that it is... I don't think that it differs in any significant way from the standard releases, its just a versioning thing. And this is something that I think is partly our responsibility, and maybe partly, our community's responsibility to try to deal with this, just the nature of releasing a software product every eighteen months means that at any given time it's always going to be behind the current release: I can't pull a Chris Fonnesbeck and tell you to go pull from the trunk of a project. But yeah, that's definitely something that we should go look at. And in particular, part of the reason that story is so hard is that ArcGIS is on Windows, and the Windows packaging story in particular is really challenging, right now. I don't know, I'd love to talk to you and see if there's things we can work out for that. 

Scipy and ArcPy shared environment
----------------------------------

Dharhas Ponhina, TWDB: Kind of following up on that, how do you move the conversation forward, because we have the issue that if we want to use the SciPy stack, we can use some functions, but then, any computer we install the scipy stack on we break our ArcPy installation. So there's no way to use some functions from ArcPy and some from outside.

Shaun: Yeah, so I think that the question was, that, you know, we might be having, using ArcPy, but you also want to have the full Scipy stack that we just saw a quick lightening talk on. And how to you deal with managing those two environments.

It's hard, basically I think Christoph Gohlke, he [manages a bunch of Python packages for Windows](http://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/pythonlibs/) and people who are scientists just end up using his packages, which he's kind enough to compile for everyone. We are trying to do more, I think we're doing some work with [NetCDF](http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf/) in particular. But yeah, I don't know exactly what the right story is, we have our own set of dependencies outside of stuff that's in Python, and I'm not sure exactly how we can go about that. I actually just circled on my notes during the SciPy talk that it seems like it would be feasible to have something like the Scipy stack that we could maybe distribute as an add-on to the software, something like that would be good. The problem that we cannot support is, just as the people in this room are representing many different scientific domains, our users represent hundreds of different groups that all have have pretty tangential needs, and so we couldn't ship all the packages that they all collectively need. But maybe something like (the Scipy stack), if that got a little more weight, that would be a nice core set that we could work on.

Rich Signell, USGS: Yeah I just wanted to talk about this very issue, because this is something that we've been very concerned with at USGS, because we did a scientific poll of all our users at a big data conference, and [70% of the people there use ArcGIS as their primary scientific analysis and visualization environment](http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/committees/2011_oct_joint/ESRI-Unidata_advances_signell_1011.pdf). So we have a site license for ArcGIS at the USGS, we have 10,000 employees, we also have a site license for the Enthought Python distribution, and we want to use those two things together. And right now they work, they work together. They actually do, I mean you can call ArcPy from Enthought, and you can can actually call the Enthought stuff from ArcGIS. But, we want to make sure that that continues, so what some other folks at Esri have at least agreed to is letting the developers know in advance, significantly in advance, what they're going to be doing in the next release, what version of numpy, what version of Python, so that groups like Continuum or Enthought, can have distributions that are compatible with ArcGIS for people that feel like that's important. So, at least that's happening.

Jonathan March, Enthought: Rich, just so we understand, there's an apparent little discrepancy here, and I'm not real clear on it myself, so, the normal use-case I'm hearing is that you're using the Esri-bundled Python, but that doesn't necessarily have to be the case, and in fact, what you're doing is using Esri libraries with another Python, with a more standard Python distribution, that solves the problem of proliferation of libraries, right?

Rich:  Yeah, that's right, we're using the numpy from Enthought, and we're just using arcpy, just calling arcpy. But you can go the other way and they both work, you can just put a path file (.pth) in the site packages, and it works, but it only works because the numpy versions are compatible and the Python versions are compatible.

Brian Root: Out of the box, right off the bat, it doesn't. I run something loading up Enthought Python, I can't access ArcPy, you have to add something to each of the installations so that they're aware of each other?   

Rich: that's correct. Right, right. At USGS, we have a custom installer script that does that for folks.

Brian: So it might be nice if either Enthought or Esri were to provide a 'here, click this button and now you've linked up your Python distributions or something like that?'

Rich: that's correct. Right, right. At USGS, we have a custom installer script that does that for folks.

Using a commercial Python distribution
--------------------------------------

Jonathan Rocher, Enthought: Would it make sense for Esri in the long run to partner with someone making a commercial distribution? So that you guys don't have to worry about this packaging system, and this building system, and then you use something that's easier for users to extend with other packages and so forth?

Shaun: So I think the question is, in the long run, does it maybe make sense for Esri to partner with a company that's maybe doing commercial packaging, and that way we don't have to be in charge of trying to distribute all these packages, and yeah, I think that it could be a way forward. I'm not really sure, but I could see that working. One thing to take into account is that a lot of people who are using our software aren't necessarily programmers at the level of skill that you all probably are presenting. They're learning programming through this means and I try to help on our forums, and there's a lot of basic questions. So, it's only some of the audience that has this need to go deal with both parts of it, but yeah, I could see something like that working... I guess my dream still is I used R, boo hiss, but I did during my masters thesis, and you know I do like [CRAN](http://cran.r-project.org/), I do like that they've dealt with this problem a little more cohesively as a community, so that would maybe be my dream, but in the absence of that, I definitely think something like partnering could work. You guys have any questions for the other two participants here? [laughter] We can have an ArcPy BoF maybe tomorrow if you want.

Details on PySAL
----------------

Mike Hearne, USGS: So I guess my first comment is, so you have a doubling of social scientists in ten years, a lot of people would be really happy with that. So my question is, I learned about PySAL, just maybe yesterday, so I wonder if you could kind of contrast it with Shapely, and some of the other libraries dealing with spatial data?

Serge: Yeah, so the way I think about the stack is you have data processing, geoprocessing, Shapely would be more for set operations on say, polygons that type of thing, where PySAL comes in is a little bit higher, so it's statistical analysis, so spatial clustering, spatial regression, region building, analysis on spatial networks, that's what we're targeting at. To get started, we had to write our own Shape readers, and now it's totally redundant because there's about 10 of them and more every week, and that's part of the sort of reinventing wheels. There's a lot of great stuff happening in this space, but people don't get together. But we're at that sort of higher end of the stack I guess is a way to put it. 

Computing sets on a sphere
--------------------------

Question: Is there something analogous to Shapely for a sphere?

Serge: I don't know, off the top of my head.

Shaun: Yeah, there's a Geodesist named Charles Karney who wrote a cross-platform library called [GeographicLib](http://geographiclib.sourceforge.net/) that works in C++, Python, Fortran and maybe even Matlab, I don't remember for sure. But he basically dealt with some of this problem, if you have two points, you can make a line that's the great circle distance between them, and you can also calculate areas of geodesic objects, and I think this is just generally still an open question, of how do we do these set operations on a sphere or an ellipsoid, I think we'd probably be OK with an ellipsoid, and I emailed him asking him about that, and he said yeah actually, that's really hard, and he's a pretty amazing mathematician so I take his word for it. I do think that's something that we can work on, and I think one thing that's true is, in the history of GIS, it's hard to use, it takes a lot of expertise to use it, and part of this whole thing is can we make tools that lower the barrier, and one of them is that people have a lot of data in [WGS84](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WGS84), and the part of me that likes to do analysis just kind of cringes because the first thing they do is open up the area column in the data layer they have and its completely meaningless because it's in degrees squared and it makes no sense! So it'd be great to have something like that. We definitely can do pieces of it without going all the way. I think you [pointing to Kelsey] mentioned subclassing Shapely to integrate it with GeographicLib, so there's stuff we can do that we can start maybe moving in that direction.

Improve organization for this community
---------------------------------------

Jonathan Rocher: This maybe is for Serge: you mentioned that your wish was for meetings like this and for the community of GIS/Python to self-organize better, do you have suggestions on how to do this? We explored having the GIS theme be one of the main themes for the conference this year, and for multiple reasons it ended up not being the base, what are your thoughts there on how to bring this community together?   

Serge:  I was at Kelsey's session, which was excellent, and I think at least we could do two of those, there are plenty of people I know that I could beat the bushes on if they had enough lead time. I think I talked to Sean [Gillies] a couple of months ago, and he said no I just can't go, it was a timing issue. But if people have enough advanced notice of when it's happening, I think there's a lot of interest in coming together.

Unidentified speaker: Why not go to the source? Why not go to the Esri user conference, and the Python contingent and talk to people there, make them aware that this is going on, and they'll come, there's a lot of people there, they're ready to come.   

Include geodatabase support in Canopy?
--------------------------------------

Mike Hearne: I actually have a question for the Enthought people, so [OGR](http://www.gdal.org/ogr/) has an optional sort of build for geodatabases, and I don't think its built-in right now, I was just wondering if that's planned, that'd be super useful. I know CIESIN actually, for example, is distributing some datasets that are in geodatabases. It'd be nice to have access to those outside of ArcGIS?

Kelsey: We might, we've talked about that, a little bit, there's some possibility that could happen. There are certainly other libraries that can be enabled in [GDAL](http://www.gdal.org/) and OGR and many of them are just compile-time options, but that one is a library that you have to distribute from Esri, and I'm not sure of the licensing on that. It certainly... it's been asked and we're considering it, but I don't think we have an answer yet.

How can we connect geospatial to the broader analysis world?
------------------------------------------------------------

Kelsey: I've got a question: the thing that came up with GIS being complicated. And I think there are people that come at it mainly from one of two directions, as a desktop analyst who learned the GIS tools and learned the functions within it, and then sort of learned Python to interact with it. But a lot of us come from the science side, where we did our programming first, and we realized that our data is spatial and we have to learn all the spatial tools and connect with that, and they're very different, and we don't always talk to each other, very much. So I'm just wondering, if each of you could maybe say a little bit about the disparate worlds of geospatial data and is it getting better, and what do we need to make it easier?

Shaun: I guess I do think it's getting easier, and I do think it's getting better, in part because both of those audiences are becoming more aware of the other one's needs more broadly, and I think there's a lot of people who maybe just started out as pure geographers who are like, hey, I need to implement this machine learning algorithm, or they have fundamental needs that are driven by the broader computer science community, and not, necessarily, explicitly spatial, they might have a quadtree or something that could easily represent a non-geographic object as well. So I think things are getting better, but part of this is an education issue. People might have coordinates, and they might not understand that they can't just measure a distance on that out of the box. So, when Google Maps came out, there was this thing called "red-dot fever" where you just threw like 10,000 points in your browser crashed because it couldn't render all of them. You might need clustering, you might need some things, and if you want to do analysis on that data, you have to build up some expertise, and I think some of that can come from the Python community in terms of providing tutorials and providing background about how to deal with geographic data. But it is getting a lot better, I think the tooling's gotten a lot better, and there's a lot more talking between those communities than there might of been in the past when they might of been a little more insular.

Andy: I guess from my perspective, I am one of those geographers that got into Python because it was the way to program ArcGIS-y things, and this was a few years ago, kind of before Model Builder was really something that people used, and you had to write your own scripts, and that was my introduction to Python. It took me a while to realize that there was a Scipy and a Numpy and all these other tools, and I don't think that's quite as far away for people doing it now. Something that might make things better is a kind of more unified GIS-y data model, like some way to encapsulate the projection that say your polygons are in, and pass those around kind of from an API tooling perspective. That might be one approach to kind of make it easier to not get wrong. Or at least kind of throw a warning, hey, you're doing something that doesn't make sense. Like a pandas for GIS. That would probably make a lot of people happy. (Kelsey exclaims 'Geopandas!') One of the challenges is that GIS data in many cases doesn't quite fit into some sort of a numpy structured array sort of thing, you know polygons, and things. That might be one possible direction to go with. 

Serge: I would agree that it's an educational issue, and I've been amazed at how things have changed radically because of Python, in terms of several of my best students are now at Esri, they didn't stay in academia, which is a loss for academia, but a boon for Esri. And they came in to a masters program with no programming background at all, and now they're some of the lead Python developers at Esri, and we've seen this again and again, not just in our shop but talking with folks internationally, it's just a wonderful language to teach, but it scales to massive science cases, and I'm blown away by the undergrads, and the stuff they're able to do, and basically pick up on their own, because we have this "world wide web" thing. The nature of education is really changing, our institutions are a little bit behind in this, but I think Python's been incredibly powerful in enabling these changes that are going to continue being very very positive. 

Python training for GIS users
-----------------------------

Mike Hearne, USGS: I guess this is a sort of follow-on question to that, so I know one example of a guy who's a GIS analyst, worked for the park service, and he wrote something where it basically goes and fetches the water level from Lake Meade or something like that, and then immediately populates this map, and sort of sets the water level on the topographic map, and they were thrilled, apparently. This was absolutely amazing to them, and so, the GIS part of it from his perspective was really easy, but the Python part, so going out and website scraping or whatever it was he did, is also really really easy, but the fact that it impressed people so much is good on the one hand, but on the other hand, that should be really simple. So my question is, is Esri, when they train people in Python, because I know you guys have a sort of training arm, that goes out and does community interaction, do you teach general Python, or do you sort of teach the ArcPy stuff? How's that work?

Shaun: So I think the question was, when we (at Esri) train people in Python, do we teach just ArcPy, or do we teach all of Python? And I actually don't know, but I hope they're teaching some of the packages that are at least included by default, right? One thing I definitely did want to mention is there's a Stackoverflow for GIS people, called [gis.stackexchange.com](http://gis.stackexchange.com) and it's a really great place if you have people that have questions about software, it covers a whole gamut of software from open source to Esri to other commercial products, and it's a good starting place for a lot of people who have these kinds of issues. But I think that's a good point: they're already learning so much on the spatial front often, they just learn how to do two things, and how do you show them how to use the join operator instead of hacking together something, and they say "WOW, IT'S SO MUCH FASTER". If you were learning Python coming at it from a computer science perspective, this is really introductory material. I'm not entirely sure, there's a new book that came out pretty recently, an [Esri Press book](http://esripress.esri.com/display/index.cfm?fuseaction=display&websiteID=224&moduleID=0), and it seems like its maybe 70% Esri specific and 30% general programming, but there's a lot just to get someone proficient in ArcPy, they need to learn all the common Python data structures, there's a lot of not, you know, using `requests` to pull down a web page, there's a lot to get even to that point. So I think maybe that's the main focus, on those core concepts first. 

Mike, follow-up question: and I will say that I think that an introduction of ArcPy into ArcGIS has probably done a huge amount for the spread of Python out into the world and into a community that maybe wouldn't have seen it before, but yeah, even if you leave out numpy and scipy, just the standard library stuff, there's a ton of stuff you can do, web scraping, sending email, parsing XML, and there's so much more you can do than with... what was the scripting language included in Arc, maybe 9 and below?

Shaun: There was Visual Basic, and before that there was Avenue, and before that there was AML.

Mike: Then you couldn't do anything that wasn't a shapefile or a coverage or whatever and was completely restricted, and Python now it's totally open, so if someone has some other dataset, a NetCDF or a CSV or whatever it is, they can deal with any of that. So maybe some education on the Esri side to communicate more of that to the users.

Alex: the Python tutorial has all that stuff though, I hear that from people a lot, and I say, well you can go learn it too! The documentation for Python is really amazing compared to a lot of computer languages.

Mike: Yeah, well, I guess I'm coming from the Python side not the ArcGIS side, and there's a guy in my office who is  a GIS analyst and he's sort of teaching himself Python, and I talked to him just a little bit, and I said, so, there's all this other stuff in there, so I think, it may not even necessarily be training, just a list of "here's a list of all the things you can do, right out of the box with the Python that comes with ArcGIS" and that list is pretty frickin' long.

Dharhas: You still have this big cognitive-- and I have this in my office-- there's a cognitive split between "I'm used to clicking buttons on a GUI" to "I'm writing a list of instructions" and that cognitive split, just the fact you have to navigate to a directory in order to do something kills it. [laugher] Someone who's never seen a command line, never written a program, is used to seeing model builder, or clicking things and stringing them together in a GUI, getting them to know that you can just type a word and something can happen. I've had this problem with colleagues, it's very difficult.

Mike: But so once you get them over the threshold, like once they're using ArcPy, it seems like...

Dharhas: They're not going to get to ArcPy. [laugher]

Mike: But it seems like, once you get to ArcPy, that's huge. I mean there are a whole bunch of paradigm shifts that they're making just to get to that point, and once they're there, you just say, "Oh, and by the way, here's all this other stuff" 

Brian Root: One thing that I've noticed is that, with Python this is sort of a curse and a blessing, all together, is that Python being so readable, and you see these examples online of someone showing "Hey, here's how I did this!" and you read it and you go "Oh, I can follow that!" and it doesn't really beg any further questions for a lot of people, you don't go "Oh, I wonder what else I could of done, or how could I tweak this", they just go "That's great, this script just exactly what I needed" and doesn't learn any further, and then a lot of the various tutorials I've seen online, and I have to admit I should have done this myself, when I did my tutorial a couple of days ago, I think it should be at the top of every single tutorial, is a link to that outline, the table of contents of the standard Python library. And I make it a personal rule, that every time I start a new project, I go to that page, and I try to pick out another thing to learn. Because I've been programming Python for four years, and I'm still finding new things in there that I didn't know existed before, and we really, as a culture, as a Python community need to get back at encouraging people to just rediscover that standard library, and that's what I think is really missing.  

Shaun: That's a great discussion. Just a couple of things I wanted to throw in there: one was there's "[Python Module of the Week](http://pymotw.com/2/about.html)", I don't know if you've seen that website, it's a great way of getting exposed to Python modules you might not be familiar with. And the other thing, on the ArcGIS side, we did relatively recently introduce the ability to make GUIs, graphical applications or extensions that are purely written in Python, and the toolboxes can be purely controlled in Python. It doesn't really solve the problem, but it is a little bit better of a "gateway drug" than the model builder to dump out my script because my boss asked me to make a copy of it or something and that's the only way they get into ArcPy. I think there is more we can do to expose people to the programming side earlier, and have them see it's value immediately.
 
IPython Notebooks for GIS
-------------------------

Rich: So we've heard a lot at the conference about IPython notebook and the ability to glue different things together, my fellow Massimo back there, maybe he can give a lightening talk tomorrow, but he's got a great application, actually if you look on the IPython [NBViewer page](http://nbviewer.ipython.org/), where he's calling GRASS, and then he's calling R, and using a lot of GIS stuff, has this GIS workflow. What are you guys see as the role of the notebook going forward in GIS?

Shaun: I would love to see more of that, and I think it's really impressive. I don't know exactly what the process communication mechanism used in that particular notebook, but now GRASS and QGIS both have Python bindings as well, so we're getting a lot of buy-in, and [FME](http://www.safe.com/) on the commercial front, there's a number of environments that are Python-based now. I think it's a really great, it'd be really great to have more of that kind of thing, and I think that might be a partial solution to the problem of "how do you get someone to care about learning how to program". And you know, you're not going to get all. They're not going to (automatically) learn about deep copies by opening a Python notebook, but it might get them interested enough to start to really dig in and try to understand the language a little better.

Andy: I think the IPython Notebook is extremely promising for GIS stuff. Thinking of it in that sort of interactive having some persistent visualization that you can kind of program and have it react to. I know that the interactive Javascript two-way communication is something that will be coming in the next year. And that seems like it's going to open a lot of doors. Particularly because, browsers themselves are becoming so powerful, that you can contain a representation of all your GIS data, and interact with it-- sort of use the browser just as a visualization layer, and kind of do the heavy fun stuff in Python and not make Python have to do the things that it's not so good at. 

Serge:  Two points on the notebook: we were talking to Fernando about, we have some older tools, previous generations, I wrote one called STARS, that was fully interactive graphics, but this is a long time ago, so I said to Fernando, it would be great if we could have that type of interactivity inside the notebook, because for exploration, the notebook's fantastic, like brushing and linking, and he said, just hold on, it's coming. But I don't know now after this morning's talk about feature creep. So that's one, but the second thing, and the most powerful example that I know of, and I told him this last night, at [GIScience this year](http://www.giscience.org/), Luc Anselin, who's my colleague, we gave an all-day workshop on PySAL, I was supposed to do the morning on exploratory spatial data analysis, and he was going to do the afternoon on spatial econometrics. And he'd never used a notebook, and I kept bugging him, look, you've got to use this thing it'll just rock your world, change how you do this! "No, no"... So, during the morning, I'm giving mine in the notebook, the tutorial, and he wrote his tutorial while I was doing mine, the first time he had ever touched the notebook, and then got up and did it, and the audience just loves it. For teaching its just a phenomenal tool, and I can't wait for what else they're going to do with it.

OSGeo Live
----------

Massimo Di Stefano, WHOI: We at [OSGeo](http://OSGeo.org), there is an [OSGeo Live](http://live.osgeo.org/en/index.html), a live DVD with all the geospatial software pre-installed, on the OSGeo Live DVD is a hidden IPython notebook, and there will be a Git repository will all notebooks that are using Python to work with spatial data. For example, using psycopg2 to work with PostGIS, the interaction between numpy and scipy, they are shipping. These are just files, so everyone can write his own notebook with all the Python stuff that is on the DVD, and add it on the repository. About the idea for better visualization for geospatial data, we were trying to have a Google summer of code to have a GIS cell, a magic GIS extension in the notebook, but [garbled audio] we are going to try this idea for next year.

Visualization and WKB as shared representation
----------------------------------------------

[Emilio Mayorga](http://staff.washington.edu/emiliom/), NANOOS: Just a couple of questions or comments... I've never had the opportunity to use PySAL, but I'm looking forward to it. And as you mentioned STARS, which I remember looking at, and brushing, with the geography of plots, today, at some talk, I forget which [someone mentions Glue], that idea of brushing, it appears to have some geography and matplotlib and an IPython terminal, and that looks really neat.

Serge: Yeah, yeah. STARS is no longer, we moved all the analytics, space-time analytics, into PySAL, and PySAL's just a library, there's no visualization, so, we're waiting to build, we have some clients in the works.

Emilio: I love the idea of a geopandas, and there was some discussion on the poor common geographic representation in Python that we share among other libraries, but it sort of exists, we have well-known blobs, that are implemented directly in PostGIS and others, it's an OGC standard. I think Shapely uses well-known blobs or something like that internally, so I think the core idea's there, I'm totally visualizing a data frame with one new data-type column being a well-known blob. It's really, in oceanography, we've got some oceanographers here, vectors are very common, and it's very often with databases its a pain, we're dealing with scalars and it's a pain to have to go from one value to two, well a blob's just multiple values.

Kelsey: Well, we have another vote for Geopandas, so we need to get Sean Gillies and Wes McKinney in a room together for a week and we'll have something. [audience: sprints Friday and Saturday] Yeah, there's sprints, if anybody is interested! (Update: since the talk, [Kelsey has started a geopandas project](https://github.com/kjordahl/geopandas))

Handling higher dimensions
--------------------------

Eric Bruning, Texas Tech: I guess I wanted to return to something that came up earlier, these disciplines talking to each other, and maybe highlight what's weird to me as a scientist coming to GIS, it seems like-- as I kind of mentioned in the talk, many of the tools have this preference for flattening the world, and then you can do stuff, and having a problem that's so inherently three-dimensional, it would be great if the GIS tools would expose, or make it more obvious, how to  get things in real 3D space, because if it's in three dimensions then I can just do stuff with it just using the regular scipy tools, while also leveraging whatever is in the GIS libraries. 

Serge: I think that in the next issue of Annals of the AAG, it's all online, [Mike Goodchild has a paper](http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00045608.2013.792175) on the future of time in GIS, and the takeaway is don't hold your breath, it's a hard problem. People are still working on space-time data structures, conceptually, what should they be?  There's no consensus that I'm aware of, and therefore a vendor, if there's no consensus, it's a slippery slope.

Eric: I guess what I need out of GIS is a lot more simple than maybe GIScience analytics, sometimes, in a lot of cases what I just want is the three dimensional surface of the earth, make it easy for me to get to it, so I can toss it into VTK.

Shaun: I agree that's a problem, the history is, we had paper maps, and then we started taking them and digitizing them, and overlaying them, and we have a lot of baggage left over from that era, but it's not necessarily right now. It's also true that Mike Goodchild's done a lot of work on looking at this, and I think I saw him give one talk where he had eight different representations of how people could use time in spatial data, and they're all totally distinct use cases, that are different development directions that you'd move in. And we are right now kind of stuck, with our common interchange language for most raster and vector data is GDAL, and that's a two-dimensional model, and there are bits and pieces of this that are fixed, you can use NetCDF, you can use some of these representations, you can encode that information, but getting a standardized version of it hasn't really happened. I think one historical reason is that it's just slower, right? Doing math on a sphere, we'll say a factor of 10 slower than doing it in a Cartesian plane, so there was reasons why people made those compromises a long time ago, but it is a good time to revisit them.

Exit stage left
---------------

Kelsey: OK, well, let's thank our panel here.
